Docs/creating an aggregate (#480)
leancodepl/corelibrary: docs/guides/01_creating_an_aggregate.md

## Scenario

Let's imagine a simple project management app where users can create projects which contain tasks to which people can be assigned. We will create two aggregates - one representing a project and the other representing a person which can be assigned to the task.

## Aggregates

Let's start with a simple model for the project aggregate.

```csharp
public class Project : IAggregateRoot<SId<Project>>
{
    private readonly List<Task> tasks = new();

    public SId<Project> Id { get; private init; }
    public string Name { get; private set; }

    public IReadOnlyList<Task> Tasks => tasks;

    DateTime IOptimisticConcurrency.DateModified { get; set; }

    private Project() { }

    public static Project Create(string name)
    {
        return new Project
        {
            Id = SId<Project>.New(),
            Name = name,
        };
    }
}
```

> As you can see, the class implements `IAggregateRoot` interface - it marks the class as being the root of an aggregate. Moreover the `Id` field of the class is of type `SId<Project>` - it is a special type present in the core library which is basically a Guid prefixed with a class name. In this case, the Id of the Project will look somewhat like `project_45a8f39f-9df0-4a23-b781-2a46de22fac1`.

Reviewer: We should have a unified reference to the package library.

```suggestion
As you can see, the class implements `IAggregateRoot` interface - it marks the class as being the root of an aggregate. Moreover the `Id` field of the class is of type `SId<Project>` - it is a special type present in the CoreLibrary which is basically a Guid prefixed with a class name. In this case, the Id of the Project will look somewhat like `project_45a8f39f-9df0-4a23-b781-2a46de22fac1`.
```

> The `Project` also has a list of `Tasks`. Notice that there are two lists containing tasks of a project - the `Tasks` one is a readonly interface for the `tasks` which contents can be changed by the class.

Reviewer 2: I'd stress that we design the API in a way that we cannot manipulate the aggregate from the outside world (only object can modify it's state based on the method it exposes)

Let's follow with a class representing a task belonging to a project:

```csharp
public class Task : IIdentifiable<SId<Task>>
{
    public SId<Task> Id { get; private init; }
    public string Name { get; private set; }
    public TaskStatus Status { get; private set; }
    public SId<User>? AssignedUser { get; private set; }

    public Project ParentProject { get; private init; }

    DateTime IOptimisticConcurrency.DateModified { get; set; }

    private Task() { }

    public static Task Create(Project parentProject, string name)
    {
        return new Task
        {
            Name = name,
            ParentProject = parentProject,
            Status = TaskStatus.NotStarted,
        };
    }

    public enum TaskStatus
    {
        NotStarted,
        InProgress,
        Finished,
    }
}
```

Notice that a task is not an aggregate root - it can only be accessed through the project to which it belongs.

> Likewise, let's create a class representing an user which can be assigned to a task:

Reviewer: It's an exception.

```suggestion
Likewise, let's create a class representing a user which can be assigned to a task:
```

Author: Thanks! Did not remember about it

```csharp
public class User : IAggregateRoot<SId<User>>
{
    public SId<User> Id { get; private init; }
    public string Name { get; private set; }
    public string Email { get; private set; }

    DateTime IOptimisticConcurrency.DateModified { get; set; }

    private Task() { }

    public static Task Create(string name, string email)
    {
        return new Task
        {
            Id = SId<User>.New(),
            Name = name,
            Email = email,
        };
    }
}
```

Notice that the `User` class is an aggregate root - the user represents a standalone business domain object with its own meaning and behavior.

## Adding logic

> So far, only the structure of objects has been defined but business domain objects usually has some set of behaviors which they can perform. In this section we will see how a logic can be added to the aggregates.

Reviewer: _perform behaviors_ sounds strange?

Let's start with a simple example of adding a few methods to the `Task` class:

```csharp
public class Task : IIdentifiable<SId<Task>>
{
    . . .

    public void Edit(string name)
    {
        Name = name;
    }

    public void AssignUser(SId<User> userId)
    {
        AssignedUser = userId;
    }

    public void UnassignUser()
    {

>         AssignUser = null;

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
        AssignedUser = null;
```

    }

    public void ChangeStatus(TaskStatus status)
    {
        Status = status;
    }
}
```

Remember that the only way to access a task is to go through the relevant project which is the aggregate root. Because of this we will add some methods to the `Project` class which will allow us to interact with the tasks:

```csharp
public class Project : IIdentifiable<SId<Project>>
{
    . . .

    public void EditTask(SId<Task> taskId, string name)
    {

>         tasks.Single(t => t.Id == taskId).Edit(name);

Reviewer: I don't ever use `.Single(...)` in my projects in favor of `.First(...)`, is it a mistake by me, here or it doesn't matter?

Author: I would say it doesn't matter that much. I find `Single(...)` more meaningful and in this this case it makes it less likely for two tasks with the same `Id` to be left unnoticed. But of course it is very unlikely in the first place.

    }

    public void AssignUserToTask(SId<Task> taskId, SId<User> userId)
    {
        tasks.Single(t => t.Id == taskId).AssignUser(userId);
    }

    public void UnassignUserFromTask(SId<Task> taskId)
    {
        tasks.Single(t => t.Id == taskId).UnassignUser(userId);
    }

    public void ChangeTaskStatus(SId<Task> taskId, TaskStatus status)
    {
        tasks.Single(t => t.Id == taskId).ChangeTaskStatus(status);
    }
}
```

Notice that these added methods can and will throw an exception if a project does not contain any task with provided Id. This is an excepted behavior - checks for respecting domain logic should be performed in respective command (or operations) validators.

## Rasing domain events

> The domain events make an important part of DDD. It is through the use of domain events that an aggregate might communicate with the rest of the system. We will see how to raise an event from the aggregate.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The domain events make an important part of DDD. It is through the use of domain events that an aggregate may communicate with the rest of the system. In this section we will see how to raise an event from an aggregate.
```

Let's imagine that we want to perform some action after a user has been assigned to a task. We will modify `AssignUserToTask` method from the `Project` class:

```csharp
public class Project : IIdentifiable<SId<Project>>
{
    . . .

    public void AssignUserToTask(SId<Task> taskId, SId<User> userId)
    {
        tasks.Single(t => t.Id == taskId).AssignUser(userId);

>         DomainEvents.Raise(new UserAssignedToTask(SId<Task> taskId, SId<User> userId));

Reviewer: Are we okay with raising domain events not from aggregate roots?

Reviewer 3: Yes, at least that is what I did for the last couple of years ^^'

Author: This is in `Project` but you are right, I marked some `Project`s as aggregate roots and others as `IIdentifiable` - all should be aggregate roots.
